1. Emptiness and reality-limitSubhuti: How should a Bodhisattva, who courses in perfect wisdom, achieve the complete conq
uest of emptiness, or how should he enter into the concentration on emptiness? The Lord: He should contemplate form, etc
., as empty.But he should contemplate that with an undisturbed series of thoughts in such a way that, when he contemplat
es the fact that “form, etc., is empty,” he does not regard that true nature of dharmas [i.e. emptiness] as something wh
ich, as a result of its own true nature [i.e. emptiness] is a real entity.But when he does not regard that true nature o
f dharmas as a real thing, then he cannot realise the reality-limit.Subhuti: With reference to the Lord having said that
“a Bodhisattva should not realise emptiness,”how does a Bodhisattva who has stood [firmly in the repeated practice of] 
this concentration [on emptiness] not realize emptiness? The Lord: It is because a Bodhisattva contemplates that emptine
ss which is possessed of the best of all modes [i.e. of the six perfections]. He does, however, not contemplate that “I 
shall realize,” or “I should realize,” but he contemplates that “this is the time for complete conquest, and not for rea
lization.” (371) Without losing himself in the concentration, he ties his thought to an objective support [for his compa
ssion] and he determines that he will take hold of perfect wisdom [which is essentially skill in means], and that he wil
l not realize [emptiness, because its realization is not the final goal].Meanwhile, however, the Bodhisattva does not lo
se the dharmas which act as the wings to enlightenment. He does not effect the extinction of the outflows [which would p
revent renewed rebirths], but over that also he achieves complete conquest.At the time when a Bodhisattva dwells in the 
concentration on emptiness – which is one of the doors to deliverance – he should also dwell in the concentration on the
Signless, but without realizing the Signless.For, endowed with the dharma of the wholesome root which has thus come abo
ut, he contemplates that “this is the time for maturing beings, and not for realization.”Taken hold of by perfect wisdom
he does not realize the reality limit.

