4. Emptiness and growth in enligthenmentSubhuti: If that is so, how can a Bodhisattva arrive, without an increase in perf
ect wisdom, at the full attainment of enlightenment, how can he know full enlightenment? The Lord: In actual fact a Bodh
isattva who courses in perfect wisdom neither increases or decreases.Just as perfect wisdom is empty, without increase o
r decrease, just so also a Bodhisattva is empty,without increase or decrease.It is because of this fact, - i.e. that jus
t as perfect wisdom is empty, (406) without increase or decrease, so also the Bodhisattva is empty,without increase or d
ecrease,- that a Bodhisattva arrives at the full attainment of enlightenment, and thus knows full enlightenment.If a Bod
hisattva, when this is being taught, is not afraid nor loses heart, then he should be known as a Bodhisattva who courses
in perfect wisdom.

Subhuti: Does then perfect wisdom course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does the emptiness of perfect 
wisdom course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Can one then apprehend outside the emptiness of perfect 
wisdom any dharma which courses in perfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does emptiness course in perfect wisdo
m? (407) The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Can one apprehend in emptiness any dharma that courses in perfect wisdom? The Lo
rd: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does emptiness course in emptiness? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does form, etc., course in p
erfect wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Can one apprehend outside form, etc., any dharma which courses in perfect 
wisdom? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: How then does a Bodhisattva course in perfect wisdom? The Lord: Do you then, Subh
uti, see a real dharma which courses in perfect wisdom? Subhuti: No, Lord.(408) The Lord: Do you see that perfect wisdom
, in which the Bodhisattva courses, as a real thing? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: Do you see as real that dharma which of
fers no basis for apprehension? Has that dharma by any chance been produced, or will it be produced, or is it being prod
uced, has it been stopped, will it be stopped, or is it being stopped? Subhuti: No, Lord.The Lord: This insight gives a 
Bodhisattva the patient acceptance of dharmas which fail to be produced.When he is endowed with that, he is predestined 
to full enlightenment.He is bound to progress towards the self-confidence of a Tathagata. It is quite impossible that a 
Bodhisattva, who courses, strives and struggles in this way, and progresses in this direction, should not reach the supr
eme cognition of a Buddha, the cognition of the all-knowing, the cognition of the great Caravan Leader.

Subhuti: Can the true nature of all dharmas, which consists in the fact that they fail to be produced, can that be predes
tined to full enlightenment? The Lord: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: How then in that case does the prediction of this dharma to 
full enlightenment take place? The Lord: Do you see as real that dharma which has a prediction to full enlightenment? (4
09) Subhuti: No, Lord.I do not see any real dharma which is at any time predestined to full enlightenment.Nor do I see a
ny real dharma which is known by the enlightened, which should be known to them, or by means of which they would have th
eir full knowledge.It is because all dharmas cannot be apprehended, that it does not occur to me to think that “this dha
rma is known to the Enlightened, this dharma should be known to them, by means of this dharma they do have their full kn
owledge.”

Chapter XXIII Sakra

