1. Depth and purity of perfect wisdomSubhuti: It is hard to gain confidence in the perfection of wisdom if one is unpract
ised, lacks in wholesome roots and is in the hands of a bad friend.The Lord: So it is, Subhuti.It is hard to gain confid
ence in the perfection of wisdom if one is unpractised, has only diminutive wholesome roots, is dull-witted, does not ca
re, has learned little, has an inferior kind of wisdom, relies on bad friends, is not eager to learn, unwilling to ask q
uestions and unpractised in wholesome dharmas.

Subhuti: How deep then is this perfection of wisdom, since it is so hard to gain confidence in it? The Lord: Form is neit
her bound nor freed,because form has no own-being.The past starting point of material process [= form] is neither bound 
nor freed,because the past starting point of a material process is without own-being.The end of a material process, in t
he future, is neither bound nor freed,because the future end of a material process is without own-being.A present materi
al process is without own-being,because the fact of being present is not a part of the own-being of a present form.(186)
And so for the remaining skandhas.

Subhuti: It is hard, it is exceedingly hard to gain confidence in the perfection of wisdom, if one is unpractised, has pl
anted no wholesome roots, is in the hands of a bad friend, has come under the sway of Mara, is lazy, of small vigour, ro
bbed of mindfulness and stupid.The Lord: So it is, Subhuti.Because the purity of form is identical with the purity of th
e fruit, and the purity of the fruit is identical with the purity of form.It is thus that the purity of form and the pur
ity of the fruit are not two, nor divided, are not broken apart, nor cut apart.It is thus that the purity of form comes 
from the purity of the fruit, and the purity of the fruit from the purity of form.(187) And the same identity exists bet
ween the purity of form and the purity of all-knowledge.The same applies to the other skandhas.

Sariputra: Deep, O Lord, is the perfection of wisdom!The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: A source of illumination is the per
fection of wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: A light is perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Not subjec
t to rebirth is perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Free from defilement is perfect wisdom.The Lord: From pu
rity.Sariputra: There is no attainment or reunion in perfect wisdom.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Perfect wisdom does
not reproduce herself.The Lord: From purity.(188) Sariputra: There is absolutely no rebirth of perfect wisdom, whether 
in the world of sense-desire, or in the world of form, or in the formless world.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Perfect
wisdom neither knows or perceives.The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: What then does perfect wisdom neither know nor perce
ive? The Lord: Form, and the other skandhas.And why? From purity.Sariputra: Perfect wisdom neither helps nor hinders all
-knowledge. The Lord: From purity.Sariputra: Perfect wisdom neither gains nor abandons any dharma. The Lord: From purity
.Subhuti: The purity of form, etc., is due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because it is absolutely pure.(189) Subhuti:
The purity of the fruit, and the purity of all-knowledge, are due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because of its absol
ute purity.Subhuti: The absence of attainment and reunion is due to the purity of self. The Lord: Because of its absolut
e purity.Subhuti: The boundlessness of form, etc., is due to the boundlessness of self. The Lord: Because of its absolut
e purity.Subhuti: A Bodhisattva who understands it thus, he has perfect wisdom. The Lord: Because of his absolute purity
.Subhuti: Moreover, this perfection of wisdom does not stand on the shore this side, nor on the shore beyond, nor athwar
t the two.The Lord: Because of its absolute purity.

(190) Subhuti: A Bodhisattva who treats even that [insight] as an object of perception, will thereby part from this perfe
ction of wisdom, and get far away from it.

