4. Enlightenment and emptinessSubhuti: How can the Lord say that full enlightenment is hard to win,exceedingly hard to wi
n, when there is no one who can win enlightenment? For, owing to the emptiness of all dharmas,no dharma exists that woul
d be able to win enlightenment.All dharmas are empty.That dharma also for the forsaking of which dharma is demonstrated,
that dharma does not exist.And also that dharma which (314) would be enlightened in full enlightenment, and that which 
should be enlightened, and that which would cognize [the enlightenment], and that which should cognize it, - all these d
harmas are empty.In this manner I am inclined to think that full enlightenment is easy to win, not hard to win.The Lord:
Because it cannot possibly come about is full enlightenment hard to win,because in reality it is not there,because it c
annot be discriminated,because it has not been fabricated [as a false appearance].

Sariputra: Also because it is empty is it hard to win, O Subhuti.For it does not occur to space that it will win full enl
ightenment.As such, i.e. as without own-being, should these dharmas be known in enlightenment.For all dharmas are the sa
me as space.And, Subhuti, if full enlightenment were easy to win, then countless Bodhisattvas would not turn away from i
t.But as countless Bodhisattvas do turn away from it, therefore one can discern (315) that full enlightenment is hard to
win, exceedingly hard to win.

Subhuti: But, Sariputra, does form, etc., turn away from full enlightenment? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Is then the 
dharma which turns away from full enlightenment other than form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does the Suchness
of form, etc., turn away? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.(316) Subhuti: Is the dharma which turns away from full enlightenment 
other than the Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does form, etc., know full enlightenment? Sariput
ra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Is the dharma which knows full enlightenment other than form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subh
uti: Does the Suchness of form, etc., know full enlightenment? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.(317) Subhuti: Is the dharma which
knows full enlightenment other than the Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Should form, etc., be k
nown in full enlightenment,or a dharma other than form, etc.(318) or the Suchness of form, etc.,or a dharma other than t
he Suchness of form, etc.? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Does Suchness turn away from full enlightenment? Sariputra: N
o, Subhuti.Subhuti: Is that dharma which turns away from full enlightenment in Suchness? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.(319) Su
bhuti: What then, Sariputra, is this dharma which turns away from full enlightenment, when we consider it as it stands i
n this nature of dharmas, which is just emptiness, after the manner of taking no stand on any dharma? Or what dharma, is
that Suchness? Is it perhaps Suchness which is turned away? Sariputra: No, Subhuti.Subhuti: Since thus, in ultimate tru
th and as things stand, no dharma can be apprehended as real, what is that dharma which is turned away from full enlight
enment? Sariputra: When one adopts the method of considering dharmas in their ultimate reality, which Subhuti the Elder 
uses in this exposition, then indeed there is no dharma which turns away from full enlightenment.But then, Venerable Sub
huti, there is no longer any ground for the distinction of those who have set their hearts on enlightenment into three k
inds of persons, as described by the Tathagata, who differ with respect to the vehicle which they have chosen.According 
to the exposition of the Venerable Subhuti there should be only one vehicle [for those whose hearts are set on enlighten
ment], i.e. the Buddha-vehicle, the Bodhisattva-vehicle, the great vehicle.

Purna: First of all the Venerable Sariputra must ask the Venerable Subhuti the Elder whether he admits even one single ki
nd of being whose heart is set on enlightenment, and who uses either the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Pratye
kabuddhas, or the great vehicle.Sariputra: Subhuti, do you admit even one single kind of being whose heart is set on enl
ightenment, and who uses either the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Bodhisattvas, or the great vehicle? (320) S
ubhuti: Sariputra, do you see in the Suchness of Suchness even one single being whose heart is set on enlightenment [i.e
. as a real entity], be he one who uses the vehicle of the Disciples, or that of the Pratyekabuddhas, or the great vehic
le? Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.Suchness, first of all, is not apprehended as of three kinds, how much less the being who
se heart is set on enlightenment.Subhuti: Is then Suchness apprehended as of one kind even? Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.S
ubhuti: Do you then perhaps see in Suchness even one single dharma which would constitute a being whose heart is set on 
enlightenment? Sariputra: Not so, Subhuti.Subhuti: Since thus, in ultimate truth and as things stand, such a dharma whic
h could constitute a being whose heart is set on enlightenment cannot be apprehended, where do you get the idea that “th
is one belongs to the vehicle of the Disciples, that one to the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddhas, that one to the great ve
hicle”? If a Bodhisattva who hears this absence of difference, distinction or differentiation between the three kinds of
persons who have set their hearts on enlightenment, in so far as they are encompassed by the same Suchness, does not be
come cowed or stolid in mind, does not turn back, then one should know that he will go forth to enlightenment.

(321) The Lord: Well said, Subhuti.Through the might and sustaining power of the Tathagata have you been inspired to say 
this.Sariputra: To which enlightenment, O Lord, will that Bodhisattva go forth? The Lord: To the full and supreme enligh
tenment.

