2. Three similesThe Lord: Suppose, Subhuti, that there were a most excellent hero, very vigorous, of high social position
, handsome, attractive and most fair to behold, of many virtues, in possession of all the finest virtues, of those virtu
es which spring from the very height of sovereignty, morality, learning, renunciation and so on. He is judicious, able t
o express himself, to formulate his views clearly, to substantiate his claims; one who always knows the suitable time, p
lace and situation for everything. In archery he has gone as far as one can go, he is successful in warding off all mann
er of attack, most skilled in all arts, and foremost, through his fine achievements, in all crafts. He has a good memory
, is intelligent, clever, steady and prudent, versed in all the treatises, has many friends, is wealthy, strong of body,
with large limbs, with all his faculties complete, (372) generous to all, dear and pleasant to many.Any work he might u
ndertake he manages to complete, he speaks methodically, shares his great riches with the many,honours what should be ho
noured, reveres what should be revered, worships what should be worshipped.Would such a person, Subhuti, feel ever incre
asing joy and zest? Subhuti: He would, O Lord.The Lord: Now suppose, further, that this person, so greatly accomplished,
should have taken his family with him on a journey, his mother and father, his sons and daughters. By some circumstance
s, they find themselves in a great, wild forest. The foolish ones among them would feel fright, terror and hair-raising 
fear.He, however, would fearlessly say to his family: “Do not be afraid! I shall soon take you safely and securely out o
f this terrible and frightening forest. I shall soon set you free!”If then more and more hostile and inimical forces sho
uld rise up against him in that forest,would this heroic man decide to abandon his family, and to take himself alone out
of that terrible and frightening forest - he who is not one to draw back, who is endowed with all the force of firmness
and vigour, who is wise, exceedingly tender and compassionate, courageous and a master of many resources? (373) Subhuti
: No, O Lord.For that person, who does not abandon his family, has at his disposal powerful resources, both within and w
ithout.On his side forces will arise in that wild forest which are quite a match for the hostile and inimical forces, an
d they will stand up for him and protect him.Those enemies and adversaries of his, who look for a weak spot, who seek fo
r a weak spot, will not gain any hold over him.He is competent to deal with the situation, and is able, unhurt and uninj
ured, soon to take out of that forest both his family and himself, and securely and safely they will reach a village, ci
ty or market-town.

The Lord: Just so, Subhuti, is it with a Bodhisattva who is full of pity and concerned with the welfare of all beings, wh
o dwells in friendliness, compassion, sympathetic joy and impartiality, who has been taken hold of by skill in means and
perfect wisdom, who has correctly turned over his wholesome roots, employing the kind of transformation which has the B
uddha’s sanction. Although he enters into the concentrations which are the doors to deliverance, i.e. the concentrations
on emptiness, the signless and the wishless, - he nevertheless just does not realise the reality-limit, i.e. neither on
the level of a Disciple, nor on that of a Pratyekabuddha.For he has at his disposal very strong and powerful helpers, i
n perfect wisdom and skill in means.Since he has not abandoned all beings, he is thus able to win full enlightenment, sa
fely and securely.At the time when a Bodhisattva has made all beings into an objective support for his thought of friend
liness, and with the highest friendliness ties himself to them, at that time he rises above the factiousness of the defi
lements and of Mara, he rises above the level of Disciple and Pratyekabuddha, (374) and he abides in that concentration 
[on friendliness].But he is not one who has attained the extinction of the outflows, he achieves a complete conquest of 
emptiness, which [in his case] is endowed with the highest perfections.At the time when a Bodhisattva dwells in the conc
entration on emptiness, which is one door to freedom, at that time he does not dwell in the concentration on the Signles
s,nor does he realise the concentration on the Signless.It is just like a bird who on its wings courses in the air. It n
either falls onto the ground, nor does it stand anywhere on any support. It dwells in space, just in the air, without be
ing either supported or settled therein.Just so a Bodhisattva dwells in the dwelling of emptiness, achieves complete con
quest over emptiness. Just so he dwells in the dwelling of the Signless and Wishless, and achieves complete conquest ove
r the Signless and Wishless.But he does not fall into emptiness, or into the Signless, or into the Wishless, with his Bu
ddha-dharmas remaining incomplete.It is as with a master of archery, strong, well trained, perfectly trained in archery.
He first would shoot one arrow upwards.He would then send after that another arrow which would check the fall of the fir
st. By a regular succession of arrows he would not permit that first arrow to fall to the ground, and that arrow would b
e kept up in the air until he should decide that it should fall to the ground.In the same way a Bodhisattva who courses 
in perfect wisdom and who is upheld by skill in means, does not realise that farthest reality-limit until his wholesome 
roots are matured, well matured in full enlightenment.Only when his wholesome roots are matured, well matured in full en
lightenment, (375) only then does he realise that farthest reality-limit.A Bodhisattva who courses in perfect wisdom, wh
o develops perfect wisdom, should therefore contemplate and meditate on the deep true nature of those dharmas, but he sh
ould not realise it.

