3. The buddhas praise the bodhisattvaFor the Buddhas and Lords, who reside in the countless world-systems, and who, surro
unded by the congregation of monks and attended by a multitude of Bodhisattvas, demonstrate dharma, will proclaim the na
me, clan, power, appearance and form of a Bodhisattva who courses and dwells in perfect wisdom, and who is endowed with 
the virtues of roaming in perfect wisdom. And they will, when they demonstrate Dharma, exult over that Bodhisattva, proc
laiming his name, clan, power, colour and form.Just here and now I demonstrate dharma, and I proclaim the name, etc., of
the Bodhisattva Ratnaketu, and of the Bodhisattva Sikhin. (450) I exult over them, and also over the other Bodhisattvas
who just now lead the holy life with the Tathagata Akshobhya.In a similar way, the Buddhas in other Buddha-fields procl
aim the name, etc., of those Bodhisattvas who just now lead the holy life here in my Buddha-field, and who dwell in the 
dwelling of perfect wisdom. And they exult over them.

Subhuti: Do the Buddhas honour all Bodhisattvas in such a manner? The Lord: No, Subhuti.But only those who are irreversib
le and free from all attachment.Subhuti: Are there, apart from the irreversible Bodhisattvas, any other Bodhisattvas who
m the Buddhas honour in such a manner? The Lord: Yes, there are. They are persons belonging to the vehicle of the Bodhis
attvas, who are strong in resisting the enemy.They are (451) just now engaged in learning the course of a Bodhisattva un
der the Tathagata Akshobhya, and the Bodhisattva Ratnaketu, course there on the pilgrimage of a Bodhisattva, and dwell e
ngaged in learning it.

In addition, those Bodhisattvas who course in perfect wisdom, and who resolutely believe that “all dharmas fail to be pro
duced” without, however, having so far acquired definitely the patient acceptance of dharmas which fail to be produced;a
s well as those who resolutely believe that “all dharmas are calmly quiet,” without, however, having entered into the at
tainment of the irreversible domain over all dharmas;those Bodhisattvas who dwell in this dwelling are honoured by the B
uddhas in the above manner.(452) But Bodhisattvas of whom the Buddhas proclaim the name, etc., and over whom they exult,
must have forsaken the level of the Disciples and Pratyekabuddhas,and one must expect them to be on the level of the Bu
ddha.And they shall be predicted to full enlightenment.For Bodhisattvas of whom the Buddhas proclaim the name, etc., and
over whom they exult, they also shall stand in irreversibility.

