2. How a bodhisattva helps beingsSubhuti: Doers of what is hard are the Bodhisattvas who have set out to win full enlight
enment.Thanks to the practice of the six perfections, as described above, they do not wish to attain release in a privat
e Nirvana of their own.They survey the highly painful world of beings. They want to win full enlightenment, and yet they
do not tremble at birth-and-death.The Lord: So it is.Doers of what is hard are the Bodhisattvas who have set out for th
e benefit and happiness of the world, out of pity for it. “We will become a shelter for the world, a refuge, the place o
f rest, the final relief, islands, lights and leaders of the world. We will win full enlightenment, and become the resor
t of the world,” – with these words they make a vigorous effort to win such a full enlightenment. (294,1)1. How then do 
the Bodhisattvas awakened to full enlightenment become the world’s shelter? They protect from all the sufferings which b
elong to birth-and-death, they struggle and make efforts to rid the world of them.2. How do they become the world’s refu
ge? They set free from birth, decay, illness, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness and despair those beings who are
doomed to undergo these conditions.3. How do they become the world’s resting place? The Tathagatas demonstrate Dharma t
o beings so that they may learn not to embrace anything.Subhuti: How does that non-embracing come about? The Lord: The n
on-embracing of form, etc., is the same as its non-connection,and as its non-production and non-stopping.(295) One thus 
learns not to embrace anything as a result of the cognition and vision that all dharmas are non-embracing, non-connected
.4. How do they become the world’s final relief? The state beyond form is not form;and yet, as the Beyond, so form, etc.
,and all dharmas.Subhuti: If form, etc., and all dharmas are the Beyond, then surely the Bodhisattvas must fully know al
l dharmas.Because there is no discrimination between them.The Lord: So it is.In that Beyond there is no discrimination.T
hrough their non-discrimination do all dharmas become fully known to the Bodhisattvas.This also is most hard for the Bod
hisattvas that they meditate on all dharmas, but neither realize (296,1), nor become cowed, and that they meditate thus:
“In this way should all these dharmas be fully known; and thus, awakened to full enlightenment, will we demonstrate the
se dharmas, and reveal them.”5. How do they become the world’s islands? ‘Islands’ are pieces of land limited by water, i
n rivers or great lakes.Just so form, etc., is limited at its beginning and end,and so are all dharmas.But the limitatio
n of all dharmas is the same as the Calm Quiet, the Sublime, as Nirvana, as the Really Existing, the Unperverted.6. How 
do they become the world’s lights? Here the Bodhisattvas win full enlightenment, and then take away all the darkness and
gloom of the un-cognition from beings who for long are enveloped in the membrane of the eggshell of ignorance, and over
come by darkness, and they illuminate them through wisdom. (297,1)7. How do they become the world’s leaders? When they h
ave become enlightened, the Bodhisattvas demonstrate dharma in order to reveal the absence of production and stopping in
the essential nature of form, etc.,and in the dharmas which constitute and distinguish ordinary people,Disciples,Pratye
kabuddhas,Bodhisattvasand Buddhas,and in all dharmas in general.8. How are they the world’s resort? When they have becom
e enlightened, the Bodhisattvas demonstrate dharma by teaching that form, etc., is situated in the world’s space.All dha
rmas are situated in space, they have not come, they have not gone, they are the same as space.Space has not come, nor g
one, it is not made, nor unmade, nor effected; it has not stood up, does not last, nor endure; it is neither produced no
r stopped. The same is true of all dharmas which are, after the fashion of space, undiscriminate.(298) Because the empti
ness of form, etc., neither comes nor goes.Nor does the emptiness of all dharmas.For all dharmas are situated in emptine
ss,and from that situation they do not depart.They are situated in the signless,the wishless,the ineffective,in non-prod
uction,no-birth,in the absence of positivity,in dreamand self,in the boundless,in the calm quiet,in Nirvana,in the Unrec
overable;they have not come,nor gone,situated in immobility;they are situated in form, etc.,(299) and in the full enligh
tenment of Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas.

