4. The meaning of ‘great being’Subhuti: Again, when the Lord speaks of a Bodhisattva as ‘a great being,’ – for what reaso
n is a Bodhisattva called a ‘great being’? The Lord: A Bodhisattva is called ‘a great being’ in the sense that he will c
ause a great mass and collection of beings to achieve the highest.

Sariputra: It is clear also to me in what sense a Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being.’ (19,1)The Lord: Then make it cle
ar what you think now!Sariputra: A Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being’ in the sense that he will demonstrate dharma so
that the great errors should be forsaken, - such erroneous views as the assumption of a self, a being, a living soul, a
person, of becoming, of not-becoming, of annihilation, of eternity, of individuality, etc.Subhuti: It is clear also to 
me in what sense a Bodhisattva is called a ‘great being.’The Lord: Then make it clear what you think now!Subhuti: A Bodh
isattva is called a ‘great being,’if he remains unattached to, and uninvolved in, the thought of enlightenment, the thou
ght of all-knowledge, the thought without outflows, the unequalled thought, the thought which equals the unequalled, uns
hared by any of the Disciples or Pratyekabuddhas.Because that thought of all-knowledge is [itself] without outflows, and
unincluded [in the empirical world]. And in respect of that thought of all-knowledge, which is without outflows and uni
ncluded,he remains unattached and uninvolved.In that sense does a Bodhisattva come to be styled a ‘great being.’

Sariputra: For what reason is he unattached even to that thought, and uninvolved in it? Subhuti: Because it is no thought
.

Sariputra: Is that thought, which is no thought, something which is? (20) Subhuti: Does there exist, or can one apprehend
, in this state of absence of thought either a ‘there is’ or a ‘there is not’? Sariputra: No, not that.Subhuti: How then
can the Venerable Sariputra say, ‘is that thought, which is no thought, something which is’? Sariputra: Well do you exp
ound this,you whom the Lord has announced as the foremost of those who dwell in Peace.

Thereupon the Venerable Purna, son of Maitrayani, said to the Lord: ‘Great being,’ one who is so called, armed with the g
reat armour is that being,he sets out in the great vehicle, is mounted on the great vehicle.That is why he comes to be s
tyled a ‘great being.’

Subhuti: How great is that which entitles him to be called ‘armed with the great armour’? The Lord: Here the Bodhisattva,
the great being, thinks thus: ‘countless beings should I lead to Nirvanaand yet there are none who lead to Nirvana,or w
ho should be led to it.’However many beings he may lead to Nirvana,yet there is not any being that has been led to Nirva
na, nor that has led others to it.For such is the true nature of dharmas, seeing that their nature is illusory.(21) Just
as if, Subhuti, a clever magician, or magician’s apprentice, were to conjure up at the crossroads a great crowd of peop
le, and then make them vanish again.What do you think, Subhuti, was anyone killed by anyone, or murdered, or destroyed, 
or made to vanish? Subhuti: No indeed, Lord.The Lord: Even so a Bodhisattva, a great being, leads countless beings to Ni
rvana,and yet there is not any being that has been led to Nirvana, nor that has led others to it.To hear this exposition
without fear, that is the great thing which entitles the Bodhisattva to be known as ‘armed with the great armour.’

Subhuti: As I understand the meaning of the Lord’s teaching, as certainly not armed with an armour should this Bodhisattv
a, this great being, be known.The Lord: So it is.For all-knowledge is not made, not unmade, not effected.Those beings al
so for whose sake he is armed with the great armour are not made, not unmade, not effected.

Subhuti: So it is.For form, etc., (22) is neither bound nor freed.And that is true also of the Suchness of form,the Suchn
ess of feeling, etc.

Purna: But what then is that form of which you say that it is neither bound nor freed, and what is that Suchness of form,
etc.?Subhuti: The form of an illusory man is neither bound nor freed. The Suchness of the form of an illusory man is ne
ither bound nor freed.(23) Because in reality it is not there at all, because it is isolated, because it is unproduced.T
his is the great armour, the great non-armour of a Bodhisattva, a great being, who is armed with the great armour, who h
as set out in the great vehicle, who has mounted on the great vehicle.After these words the Venerable Purna was silent.

